This article presents an empirical case study in the diachronic specialization of morphosyntactic forms for different syntactic contexts, and uses it to developa theory of variational specialization (Wallenberg, To Appear). Specifically, the study tests hypotheses about the speed of diachronic specialization, and answers a question I'll refer to as Yang's Paradox: how can we reconcile diachronic results showing that specialization is slow, with experimental results on acquisition showing that it's fast?

To do this, the main empirical problem I focus on is the diachronic specialization of the forms "melted" and "molten" in pre-modern English. Though the forms initially had the same meaning and syntactic distribution, they eventually specialized for perfect/passive participle and adjectival contexts, respectively, as shown in examples (1)-(3).

   (1) The gold was {melted / *molten} by the fire. (passive participle context)
   (2) The fire has {melted / *molten} the gold. (perfect participle context)
   (3) She shaped the {?melted / molten} gold into a ring. (adjectival context)

This study tests (and ultimately supports) the hypothesis that specialization in a speech community is orders of magnitude slower than specialization for an individual child in an experimental setting, due to the problem of coordinating the dimension and direction of specialization among many speakers. I also show how Yang's (2000) variational grammar learning model can be extended to the problem of specialization, and that children don't need to have a very active role in specializing linguistic forms: they only need to identify potential contexts that the forms could specialize for, and the learning analog of natural selection does the rest.

Wallenberg, Joel C. To Appear. A variational theory of specialization in acquisition and diachrony. To appear in Miriam Bouzouita, Anne Breitbarth, and Lieven Danckaert eds., "Diachronic Stability" (working title), John Benjamins.

Yang, Charles D. 2000. Internal and external forces in language change. Language variation and change, 12(3), 231-250.
